  Donor exits can create shocks to a country's health system affecting 
human resources for health, service delivery, medicines and technologies, 
and health financing especially if both financing and technical support are 
withdrawn.The upcoming graduates appear to have less domestic capacity to handle
 such shocks. One particular concern is the impact of such a transition on human
 resources for health. 
The loss of external support can lead to gaps in staffing and technical capacity, 
weakening the health workforce and reducing the quality of health services [16,17].
 Another concern is what happens to the quality and coverage of services delivered 
to vulnerable populations such as prisoners, men who have sex with men, commercial
 sex workers, and injection drug users when donors withdraw support. Such 
populations are at a higher risk of HIV infection, and prevention and 
treatment programs for these groups are heavily supported by donors 
like the Global Fund. When donor exits are poorly managed, these 
populations can experience HIV resurgence [18].

A fourth, related transition is the new focus within the global
 health community on domestic resource mobilization for health, 
exemplified by the United Nations Addis Ababa Action Agenda 
that lays out a roadmap for financing the SDGs [19]. Estimates
 suggest that it will cost LICs and MICs an additional US$371 
billion per year in health spending by 2030 to reach the 
health-related SDG targets [20]. Most of this additional 
spending will have to come from domestic sources. Yet many 
countries have so far seen little or no mobilization of 
domestic resources, in part because they have not prioritized
 health spending. Indeed, there is growing evidence that health 
has become a lesser budgetary priority in many countries [21].

MICs need a joined-up approach to transition
These complex transitions are highly interlinked and cannot be 
managed in isolation. To give one example, Ghana, which is currently 
in Gavis preparatory transition phase, cannot only worry about
 replacing external financing for vaccination; it must also prepare 
for a rise in the prevalence of NCDs and in health costs, linked
 to an extraordinary rise in obesity and overweight in its population.
 More than 4 in 10 Ghanaians now have obesity or are overweight [22].
 All MICs need an overarching, joined-up strategic approach to transition. 
But what would such an approach entail?

First, a transformation of health systems is needed including benefits
 packages and delivery platformsin ways that respond to the shifts
 in disease burden and demography. Health services will need to be 
delivered mostly through primary care platforms, which will have to 
provide integrated, longitudinal models of care for many chronic 
health conditions [23]. The second component of a joined-up approach 
would be a health financing revolutioninvolving sustained domestic
 resource mobilization, pooling, and strategic purchasing of services.
 Governments of MICs can draw on an expanding evidence base on how to 
raise revenues for health through tax reform and to allocate and spend
 funds in ways that maximize health and value for money [24]. Third, 
joint donor MIC transition plans must be developed that take into 
account the importance of health system strengthening and of reaching 
vulnerable populations before, during, and after transition [18,25].

 Finally, the international community can support transitioning MICs 
through providing global public goods for health. These goods include 
supporting (i) the development of new health technologies to tackle
 diseases of poverty, (ii) pooled procurement, market shaping, and
 revolving funds to bring down the prices of medicines, vaccines,
 diagnostics, and other health technologies, and (iii) tackling
 global antimicrobial resistance, including the control of
 multidrug-resistant tuberculosis [17].

With a joined-up strategy, the 4Ds of global health transition
 could become an opportunity for accelerated rather than stalled 
progress. MICs themselves should, of course, be in the driving seat 
when it comes to leading such strategy development, supported by 
technical agencies and donors who assist with transition planning 
and who boost their support for global public goods. By anticipating 
the disease and demographic trends ahead and what these mean for future 
financing needs, mobilizing the required resources to fund the right
 health benefits packages, and supporting intersectoral policies for
 health improvement (e.g., policies to curb indoor air pollution and 
road traffic injuries) [26], MICs could see a health transformation
 in the SDGs era
