Introduction

Cesarean section (CS), although essential and lifesaving with the correct indication, is largely unnecessary in nonemergency conditions, leading to greater financial costs relative to vaginal delivery, without proven benefit, and increasing risks for maternal morbidity and mortality [1–8]. In addition, CS has been associated with elevated risks of adverse maternal and perinatal outcomes in future pregnancies, including maternal and intra-uterine fetal death [9–13].

Since 1985, the World Health Organization (WHO) has recommended that national CS rates not exceed 10% to 15% [14]. A statement issued in 2016 further strengthened WHO’s position, with evidence suggesting that population-level CS rates higher than 10% are not associated with reduced maternal and neonatal mortality [15]. Contrary to the recommendation, the rate of cesarean delivery has been rising sharply in the last two decades worldwide [16,17]. A study of 194 WHO member states estimated global cesarean deliveries to be 22.9 million in 2012 [16]. A nationwide study covering 2,865 counties in China reported that the overall annual CS rate rose from 28.8% in 2008 to 34.9% in 2014 [18]. Interestingly, data from 438 Chinese hospitals in the National Maternal Near Miss Surveillance System showed that the CS rate declined from 45.3% in 2012 to 41.1% in 2016 [19]. In Guangzhou, the third largest city in China with a population of 14 million and 300,000 annual births, the CS rate was about 40% between 2001 and 2010, far higher than the national average and the level recommended by WHO.

The risk for adverse outcomes has prompted the Health Commission of Guangzhou Municipality to investigate strategies to reduce CS rates and to improve the quality of intrapartum care [18]. A review was carried out and identified a number of strategies shown to be effective in a range of settings [20–22]. Although the drivers of high CS rates in Guangzhou have not been investigated, other areas of China have reported that CS rates may have been driven up because of fear of pain during labor and of perceived risks for the baby caused by vaginal birth, distrust of and dissatisfaction with the healthcare system, and intrinsic cultural beliefs popular among Chinese families [23,24]. Based on these findings, the Health Commission determined that the most appropriate intervention should aim to raise public knowledge and awareness towards CS and to improve the quality of maternal healthcare services. Consequently, the Action Plan for Safe Motherhood and Infancy, a comprehensive health promotion program aiming to control and reduce maternal and infant mortality in Guangzhou, was developed in 2010. As an integral component of this plan, an intervention package intended to reduce CS rate was implemented in 2 stages (October 2010 to September 2014 and October 2014 to December 2016) and comprised programs for population health education, skills training to healthcare professionals, equipment and technical support for local healthcare facilities, and capacity building for the maternal near-miss care system.

Using routine surveillance data between January 1, 2008, and December 31, 2016, the present study aimed to evaluate changes of the overall CS rate in Guangzhou over the period of the two-stage intervention. Trends in maternal and perinatal mortality were also examined to evaluate the safety of the intervention package when reducing the CS rate.
Materials and methods
Study design

This is a repeated cross-sectional study aiming to retrospectively evaluate a two-stage intervention package implemented by the municipal government to reduce the overall CS rate in Guangzhou. The conduct of this study was fully compliant with relevant national regulations and was approved by the institutional ethical committee board of Guangzhou Women and Children’s Medical Center. An analysis plan was developed prior to the study (S1 File). This study is reported as per the REporting of studies Conducted using Observational Routinely-collected health Data (RECORD) guideline (S1 Checklist).
Design and implementation of the two-stage intervention package

The intervention was part of a large-scale municipality-wide maternal and neonatal health promotion program, the Action Plan for Safe Motherhood and Infancy, with the overall aim to reduce maternal and neonatal mortality in Guangzhou. Detailed information about the intervention package is presented in Table 1. Before the intervention began, detailed documentation on the contents, requirements, targets, timeline, responsibilities, funding, supervision, quality assurance, and evaluation approaches was issued to all relevant government agencies and healthcare facilities in Guangzhou. There were 3 elements in Stage 1 (October 1, 2010, to September 30, 2014): health education, skills training, and capacity building. Full-time staff were appointed to take up the responsibility of health education in all 12 districts of Guangzhou, organizing lectures for pregnant women and their family members on the advantages of vaginal delivery as well as other important topics in perinatal health. Also as part of the publicity campaign, they held roadshows in the community with posters and videos and handed out information leaflets. For the skills training element, specialists from secondary and tertiary hospitals (larger in scale and more specialized in healthcare services) were paired up with local primary facilities to provide intensive clinical training for midwives and obstetricians, focusing on pain-free vaginal delivery and other advanced clinical management strategies and techniques. For capacity building, 6 new municipal maternal near-miss care centers were set up to fill the void in the maternal and child healthcare and referral system in Guangzhou (S1 Fig). Towards the end of Stage 1, an interim evaluation and a comprehensive needs assessment for the public, for healthcare institutions, and for public health agencies were conducted. Having incorporated input from stakeholders, the municipal government launched the second intervention stage (October 1, 2014, to December 31, 2016). The health education and skills training elements were maintained with minor adjustments. Resources were allocated to provide equipment and technical support for healthcare facilities and to construct 8 district-level care centers for maternal near misses in this stage.
